all right
yes get up our picture of the earth
there's this pretty awesome I'm a
geologist so I get pretty psyched about
this but the earth is great it's
powerful its dynamic it's constantly
changing it's a pretty exciting place to
live but I want to share with you guys
today my perspective as a geologist and
how understanding Earth's past can help
inform and guide decisions that we make
today about how to sustainably live on
Earth's surface so there's a lot of
exciting things that go on on the
surface of yours if we zoom in here a
little bit I want to talk to you guys a
little bit about one of the things that
happens as material gets shuffled around
Earth's surface all the time and one of
the big things that happens is material
from high mountains gets eroded and
transported and deposited in the sea and
this process is ongoing all the time and
it has huge effects on how the landscape
works so this example here in South
India we have some of the biggest
mountains in the world and you can see
in the satellite photo rivers
transporting material from those
mountains out to the sea you can think
of these rivers like bulldozers they're
basically taking these mountains and
pushing them down towards the sea give
us an example here Suzu in a little bit
I want to talk to you guys specifically
about a river you can see these
beautiful patterns that the rivers make
as they're pushing material down to the
sea but these patterns aren't static
these rivers are wiggling and jumping
around quite a bit and it can have big
impacts on our lives so an example of
this is this is a Cosi river so the
closer you River has this nice t-shaped
pathway and it exits the big mountains
of Nepal carrying with it a ton of
material a lot of sediment that's being
eroded from the high mountains and it
spreads out across India and lose this
material so we're going to zoom in to
this area and I'm going to tell you a
little bit about what happened with the
with the co-ceo is an example of how
dynamically systems can be so this is a
satellite image from August of 2008 and
this satellite image is colored so that
vegetation or plants show up as green
and water shows up as blue so here again
you can see that C shaped pathway that
this River takes is a Texas Nepal and
now this is monsoon season
monsoon season in this region of the
world and anyone that lives near a river
is no stranger to flooding and the
hazards and inconveniences at minimum
that are associated with that but
something interesting happened in 2008
and this river moved in a way that's
very different it flooded in a way
that's very different than it normally
does
so the Kosi River is flowing down here
but sometimes as these rivers are
bulldozing sediments they kind of get
clogged and these clogs can actually
cause the rivers to shift their course
dramatically so this satellite image is
from just two weeks later here's the
previous pathway that c-shaped pathway
and you notice it's not blue anymore
but now what we have is this blue
pathway that cuts down the middle of the
field of view here what happened is the
Kosi River jumped its banks and for
reference the scale bar here is 40 miles
this river moved all over 30 miles very
abruptly so this river got clogged and
it jumped its banks here's an image from
about a week later and you can see these
are the previous pathways and you can
see this process of river jumping
continues as this river moves farther
away from its major course so you can
imagine and landscapes like this where
rivers move around frequently it's
really important to understand when
where and how they're going to jump but
these kinds of processes also happen a
lot closer to home as well
so in the United States we have the
Mississippi River that drains most of
the continental US it pushes material
from the Rocky Mountains and from the
Great Plains it drains and moves it all
the way across America and dumps it out
in the Gulf of Mexico so this is the
course of the Mississippi that we're
familiar with today but it didn't always
flow in this direction if we use the
geologic record we can reconstruct where
it went in the past so for example this
red area here is where we know the
Mississippi River flowed and deposited
material about 4600 years ago then about
3,500 years ago it moves to follow the
course outlined here in orange and it
kept moving and it keeps moving so
here's about two thousand years ago a
thousand years ago seven hundred years
ago and it was only as recently as five
hundred years ago that it occupied the
pathway that we're familiar with today
so these processes are really important
and especially here this Delta Area
where these river jumping events in the
Mississippi are building land at the
interface of the land in the sea this is
really valuable real estate and there's
some of the most Delta's like this are
some of the most densely populated areas
on our planet
so understanding the dynamics of these
landscapes how they formed and how they
will continue to change in the future is
really important for the people that
live there so river is also wiggle these
are sort of bigger jumps that we've been
talking about I want to show you guys
some River Wiggles here so we're going
to fly down to the Amazon River Basin
and here again we have a big river
system that is draining and moving and
plowing material from the Andes
Mountains transporting it across South
America and dumping it out into the
Atlantic Ocean so if we zoom in here you
guys can see these nice curvy River
pathways again they're really beautiful
but again they're not status these
rivers wiggle around we can use
satellite imagery over the last 30 or so
years to actually monitor how these
change so take a minute and just watch
any bend or curve in this river and
you'll see it doesn't stay in the same
place for very long it changes and
evolves and warps its pattern if you
look in this area in particular I want
you guys to notice there's a sort of a
loop in the river that gets completely
cut off it's almost like a whip cracking
and snaps off the pathway of the river
at a certain spot so just for reference
again so in this location that River
changed its course over four miles over
the course of a season or two so the
landscapes that we live in on earth I
have this material that's being eroded
from mountains and transported the sea
or wiggling around all the time they're
changing all the time and we need to be
able to understand these processes so we
can manage and live sustainably on these
landscapes but it's hard to do if the
only information we have is what's going
on today at Earth's surface right we
don't have a lot of observations we only
here only have 30 you know 30 years
worth of satellite photos for example we
need more observations to understand
these processes more and additionally we
need to know how these landscapes are
going to respond to changing climate and
to changing land use as we continue to
occupy and modify our surface so this
this is where the rocks come in
so as rivers flow because they're
bulldozing material from the mountains
to the sea
sometimes bits of sand and clay and
rocks get stuck in the ground and that
stuff they get stuck in the ground gets
buried and through time we get big thick
accumulations of sediments that
eventually turn into rocks what this
means is that we can go to places like
this where we see big big stacks of
sedimentary rocks and go back in time
and see what the landscapes look like in
the past we can do this to help
reconstruct and understand how how
Earth's landscapes evolved this is a
pretty convenient - because the earth
has had sort of an epic history right so
this video here is a reconstruction of
paleo geography for the first just the
first six hundred million years of our
history just a little bit of time here
so as the plates move around we know
climate has changed sea level has
changed we have a lot of different types
of landscapes and different types of
environments that we can go back if we
have a time machine we can go back and
look at and we do indeed have a time
machine because we can look at the rocks
that were deposited at these times I'm
going to give you an example of this and
take you to a special time in Earth's
past about 55 million years ago there
was a really abrupt warming event and
what happened was a whole bunch of
carbon dioxide was released into
atmosphere and it caused a rapid and
pretty extreme global warming event and
when I say warm I mean pretty warm that
there were things like crocodiles and
palm trees as far north as Canada and as
far south as Patagonia so this is a
pretty warm time and it happened really
abruptly so what we can do is we can go
back and find rocks that were deposited
this time and reconstruct how the
landscape changed in response to this
warming event so here yayyyy rocks so
here's here's a pile of rocks
this yellow blob here this is actually a
fossil River so just like this cartoon I
showed these are deposits that were laid
down fifty five million years ago
it's geologists we can go and look at
these up close and reconstruct the
landscape so here's another example the
yellow blob here is a fossil River
here's another one above it we can go
and look in detail and make my
and observations and we can measure
features for example the features I just
highlighted there tell us that this
particular River was probably about
three feet deep you could wade across
this cute little stream if you are
walking around fifty five million years
ago the reddish stuff that's above and
below those channels those are ancient
soil deposits so we can look at those to
tell us what lived and grew on the
landscape and to understand how these
rivers were interacting with their
floodplains so we can look in detail and
we can reconstruct with some some
specificity how these rivers flowed and
what the landscapes look like so when we
do this for this particular place at
this time if we look what happened
before this abrupt warming event the
rivers kind of carved their way down
from the mountains to the sea and they
did so me they look maybe similar to
what we what I showed you in the Amazon
River Basin but right at the onset of
this climate change event the rivers
change dramatically all of a sudden they
got much broader and they started to
slide back and forth across the
landscape more readily eventually the
rivers reverted back to a state that was
more similar to what they would have
looked like before this climate event
but it took a long long time so we can
go back and there's time and do these
kinds of reconstructions and understand
how Earth's landscape has changed in
response to a climate event like this or
a land-use event so some of the ways
that rivers change are the reasons that
rivers change their pattern and their
and their movements is because of things
like with extra water falling on the
land surface when when climate is hotter
we can move more sediment and Road more
sediment and that changes how rivers
behave so ultimately as long as Earth's
surface is our home we need to carefully
manage the resources and risks
associated with living and dynamic
environments and I think the only way we
can really do that sustainably is if we
include information about how landscapes
evolved and behaved in Earth's past
thank you
you
[Music]